The phenomenal increase in the use of computers, cell phones and other digital devices within homes and businesses worldwide has led to improvements in many sectors of society, from entertainment to commerce. Internet phone services are predicted to be the future in telephone communications. These services are growing in popularity. Today's technological markets offer VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) as a great new way to make and receive telephone calls. These services use the Internet instead of the traditional line. The Times has recently discovered that the next generation of cell phones has Wi-Fi access built into them.  Although there are some nasty non-technical details to be worked out, these phones can go online via a hotspot as easily as they connect to a cell tower.

IP networks send data along different routes and so the data can reach the destination even if one or more routes are down. This is not possible with a traditional line. Calls are converted into data that zips through the connection like email. This is much less expensive than most traditional service. This can be especially good for businesses when contacting or communicating with other businesses or associates in different areas of the country or world. Most of the bandwidth of circuit switch networks is unutilized. IP network makes use of its bandwidth using multiplexing, compression, coding and other techniques not used in traditional networks. This improves voice quality.

Most importantly VOIP is harder to tap into because it blends in with other data traffic. And decrypting the VOIP packets would make it very difficult (but not absolutely impossible) for the FBI/CIA/NSA or any other party to hear the conversation as it occurs.

In this project we will develop a system for the university so the typical old system of traditional line telephone exchanges can be eliminated. When a person from outside the university make call on the university land line number. She/he will be connected to the server, IVR will be initiated. Three options will be given to that person. Either enter the fix code number of the recipient to talk to him/her or talk to the operator else record generic Voice Message for the university. If that person knows the code he/she will dial it, our server will than trace that person against the code within the university premises if available that land line call will be routed to the recipient Wi-Fi enabled cell phone through Wi-Fi Hot Spots. The second thing that our system will be able to provide is the free of charge calls from one Wi-Fi enabled cell phone to another, with in university premises. When the user connects to our system using Wi-Fi enabled cell phone he/she will be able to make free call to other persons connected to our system. If he/she knows the assigned code of the recipient then upon dialing the code he/she will be connected to the recipient threw Wi-Fi Hot Spots could be client server or peer to peer else can check the availability of the recipient by the help of the operator.


The system will be able to deliver following things,
1.   Portable solution to the traditional telephone line exchanges with in the university premises.
2. One would be able to make free of charge calls to another person within the university premises using their Wi-Fi enabled cell phones.
3. Voice Message recording service will also be provided in case of unavailability of the recipient.